# Temporal

My friend Jee has been raving about Temporal for a while now, and I had no idea what he was talking about, because the Temporal docs/marketing are hard to wrap your head around. I finally got him to explain what Temporal is and why it's exciting. These are my notes on that conversation.

## Introduction

- Linux distros
- Frontend js frameworks in the 2000s
- Queueing libraries in the 2010s

Sometimes there's an explosion of open-source software/libraries because everyone knows the status quo sucks, but none of those new options is actually substantially better.

Eventually someone actually makes a better alternative, which dominates:

- Linux distros ➜ macOS
- Frontend JS frameworks ➜ React
- Queueing libraries ➜ Temporal (?)

## What Temporal is

Temporal is a cross-language queueing framework. That doesn't seem novel, since queues have existed for a long time and are part of the standard arsenal of systems tooling.

But dealing with queues kind of sucks. In particular, while all queue frameworks provide the bare minimum of actually providing a queue and delivering messages / invoking handler code, you always end up writing a lot of repetitive code around retry semantics and dealing with failures and timeouts.

## How Temporal works: Workflows and Activities

So Temporal provides two abstractions, Workflows and Activities. The general flow is:

    external system → Workflow → one or more Activities

Activities are where your juicy application logic happens. They are plain old code with no restrictions.

Workflows wire up one or more Activities together. They're written in a hermetic environment, with no external dependencies, and are supposed to be fully deterministic. Temporal is cross-language, but using Go as an example, you don't get `context.Context`, no `sleep()`, no `random()`, etc.

The payoff here is that, since they are pure functions, Workflows can be rerun, and thus the system can automatically retry.

How does a Workflow do anything interesting in this environment? By invoking Activities. And every Activity invocation gets recorded in the Workflow's "execution history", so if a Workflow crashes and is retried on another machine, the framework just replays the history (until it reaches the point it hasn't executed yet).

(The closest analogy is to React Hooks, which have similar limitations on how they're written and are supposed to be re-runnable automatically. Even though you're writing procedural code, it's code that's meant to be safe to be re-entered.)

So Temporal provides Workflows with a lot of utility functions to do standard nondeterministic stuff, like its own versions of `sleep()` and `random()`, and all these functions record the invocation and result in the Workflow history. So when you replay, for `sleep()` it just skips it, and for `random()` it returns the same value.

## Cross-worker/language/runtime interaction

Incidentally, the Workflow/Activity boundary provides a very nice cross-worker/language interaction point. Every Activity interaction goes to the Temporal server, and workers in other languages can be registered to respond to it.

This is an even more flexible form of a typical queue system usecase, something like "my business logic is written in Go but I need to run an LLM in PyTorch". (At Stripe we had an entire service that just ran ImageMagick, which was the best tool for image processing but had numerous security vulnerabilities.)

For low-scale, heavy-business-logic use cases, this can be a nice replacement for RPCs.

## Summary

Workflows are re-entrant, Activities can't be re-run.

Splitting the code up this way allows the framework to automatically retry Workflows without re-running code in Activities. Thus the framework implements a lot of boilerplate code around recovery logic, callbacks, and timeouts.

This split tends to put business logic in Workflows and application code (like writing to database or calling APIs) in Activities. But there's some discretion here, a lot of business logic could be on either side.

Hopefully with this conceptual explanation you'll be more equipped if you ever
use Temporal, because their docs are kinda nebulous and it took me a while to
understand why there's two abstractions for different types of work the system
can execute.
